hey everyone how's it going lazela
montgomery here with an old chp episode
from way back in june of 2014
for a number of reasons well one mainly
i wanted to revisit this episode and
post it on my rss feed and youtube
channels to
introduce this rather unknown from
chinese american history
as many listeners of the chp know
in addition to chinese history from
ancient to modern times i occasionally
will feature the history of overseas
chinese including topics on the hokkien
hakas hoisan and dyochos
i also featured an episode on the
chinese
who emigrated to mexico and their
history and what they had to go through
in that country
our neighbor to the south i've also
featured topics from
chinese american history the exclusion
act of 1882
the tong wars uh ing dok hey
vincent chin and most recently dr jian
xiong-woo
today i wanted to take one more look at
this old episode and for anyone who's
interested
take a look at those days of the mid to
late 1800s and zero in on
the life of someone who was one of the
earliest crusaders of anti-racism
against asians in general
and chinese americans in particular the
fight against racism
it continues to this day only four
months into this year of 2021 there's
been a great amount of demonstrations
and protests across the land
calling for more acceptance of and less
animosity directed against
asian americans including native
hawaiians and pacific islanders
i guess you could call me i guess i'm
sort of a nobody
just an average joe in america yet even
in my own family
with my wife and members of her family
they too had to put up with these
not particularly friendly remarks
directed against them because they're
asian
so i wanted to reintroduce wong ching fu
and his story
one more time i hope no one objects too
strongly about this
before there was i am pay an wang nancy
kwan yo yo ma
anna sue vivian tom verowong
connie chung andrew chang andrew yang
kaifu lee before there was wayne wong
ishon wong
charles wong amy tan charles cacow t
d lee samuel c c ting stephen chu
and gary locke and the hundreds and
hundreds of other notable chinese
americans who contributed mightily
to america's greatness in the world
there was wong ching fu
and in this episode i'd like to once
again look at his life
and his struggle to not only introduce
chinese customs and traditions to
americans in the late 19th century
but also for his fight to obtain normal
everyday civil rights to chinese
immigrants who
after obtaining citizenship were proud
to call themselves chinese americans
two decades after lincoln freed the
slaves chinese in america found
themselves targeted as a race of people
singled out for exclusion from the
american dream
only them no one else so before
all the great achievers of chinese
descent who made their mark in the 20th
and 21st centuries
before they achieved national and
international renown
in art science business education
politics entertainment medicine in the
military
and in engineering they needed somebody
to
blaze the trail for them and ensure the
emerging fabric of american society
included them as well the path to
american citizenship for almost all
chinese immigrants after 1882
was closed completely airtight it was
impossible to
find any legal way to get around the
laws
1882 1888 and 1892
these exclusion laws prohibiting chinese
immigrants any path to citizenship
were enacted and enforced and trust me
wherever there was a loophole
it didn't last long the subject of
today's chp episode
wong ching fu wasn't the only brave
chinese american to stand up on a
national level and
protest these unfair laws there was
young wing
norman ah singh who i mentioned in chp
episode 128
there was also and walter urai alum
tenemo a few more wong chin fu
together with these mostly forgotten
heroes
led the charge against this terrible
injustice from
america's past history now i don't want
to make wong chin fu out to be like the
first chinese american
who did this or said that or portray him
in that light like i said
the chinese-american story in the 19th
century
was written partly by those whose names
may remember
as well as the countless others like
wong chin foo who
for more than a century has slipped
through the cracks of the historical
record
i guess even today wong chin foo would
remain almost totally forgot
had it not been for my good friend and
author
as well as a paid in full member of the
generation of china hands going back to
the 1970s
mr scott seligman his book called the
first
chinese american the remarkable life of
wong ching foo
was published in 2013 by the hong kong
university press
wong ching foo's story is a pretty
remarkable one for someone sort of
pushed into the dustbin of old and
forgotten history
scott seligman's work resurrected wong
ching foo
and through meticulous research he's
brought this man
and the times he lived in back to life
to put this in perspective for my fellow
amerikonski's
wong ching fu's period in the u.s was
spread out over the
seven presidencies from andrew johnson
to benjamin harrison
now you'd think with a name like wang
chin fu
he'd be one of those chinese immigrants
who made their way to the golden door
via taishan
or one of the other counties of the
pearl river delta region but wong shinfu
or in mandarin
wang ching fu was not your typical
southern chinese who made his way to the
u.s
to work the mines or build the railroads
he was a northerner
from shandong but in the u.s during his
lifetime
he went by the name wong and that's how
we know him today
but as our story unfolds you'll see the
last group of people he ever wanted to
be lumped in with were these
chinese immigrants who came from the
pearl river delta region
he was born wong sake in 1847
in jimmah just north of the
beautiful and historic city of qingdao
the daokuang emperor was in the
final years of his miserable reign in
mandarin
wong sake's name may or may not have
been wang suichi
his father was in the tea business and
man didn't do too badly but after being
smacked down with some
bad luck father and son ended up in
desperate straits and reduced begging to
survive
and it was to yentai shandong province
again
that the father and son ended up back in
those days the city was known as jer
fool
and thanks to the treaties following the
opium war gerfoud was one of those
cities
where the doors were flung open to
foreign trade
and missionaries and one of those
missionaries was a woman named
sally holmes a southern baptist from
upperville virginia
a little over an hour west of the
nation's capital
she and her husband landrum left for
china in 1858 to go do god's work
arriving in early 1859.
on the last day of the year 1860 they
arrived in jirfu
the first missionaries to do so
in july of 1861 young wong sake
was taken in and adopted by the holmeses
by year's end sally lost not only her
infant daughter to disease but her
husband as well
who was murdered by a gang of bandits
remember the 1860s were
tough times in china thanks to the
general lawlessness of the day
brought on by the taiping rebellion and
the general weakness
of the dying qing dynasty government
in july 1862 sally moved her family to
modern-day pong lai
back then called dangjo midway between
yentai and long co
the first protestant church north of
shanghai was established there
the north street baptist church five
years later in 1867
after a good and decent missionary
school education
20 year old wong sake was baptized
to seek medical attention for her son
sally headed back to the u.s
she brought wong sake with her sally
holmes had this thinking
to train young wong to become a
missionary
the main idea was to teach him
everything there was to know about the
bible
and christianity then send them back to
china to go spread the good word
early western missionaries learned the
going was just
too rough and unpredictable to try and
convert the chinese to christianity
language barriers cultural barriers you
name it it was an uphill struggle from
the get-go
but it was thought if you could get the
locals up to snuff
about the bible and everything that was
great about christianity
you could send them into the wilds of
china and they would be able to bring
the masses over to jesus
a heck of a lot easier than they ever
could
in theory that's how it worked and there
were many
early chinese protestant missionaries
who did just that
our hero wong ching fu was not one of
them
sally holmes investment wasn't gonna get
the return she was hoping
for in fact it turned out to be just the
opposite but
i'm getting ahead of myself wong
continued his education in the u.s
and in june 1868 there was the first
ever record of his existence in the u.s
when it was noted that he attended a
methodist episcopal conference in ohio
he had studied for a while at colombian
college in dc
and then the lewisburg academy in
pennsylvania today's
bucknell university colombian was the
forerunner of today's
george washington university both at the
time baptist schools
it was during this time in the years
immediately following the u.s civil war
as a student though not for long in the
northeast
that wong ching fu began to exhibit
all the characteristics that would later
define him
he was only five foot four i guess you
could say he was a small guy
even by 19th century standards northern
chinese
are usually taller and bigger than their
southern brethren but
certainly this wasn't the case with wong
fu but there was this
gigantic life that belied his rather
small frame
first of all he was an incredible
showman he figured out the american
system
real quick how it worked what made
americans tick
the values the politics everything
the second thing is that he was educated
in missionary schools as a young boy in
shandong
and furthered his studies in the u.s
northeast
so not only was he totally fluent in
english he was quite eloquent as well
and the same went with his writing
what he wasn't was an astute businessman
or someone who knew when to keep his
mouth shut
as the story unfolds you'll see he
didn't stand down to anyone
no matter how high and mighty they were
or how much bigger they were than he was
he got that you know what kicked out of
him repeatedly throughout his life
he wasn't a fighter who used his
physical might he used his voice
his pen and his quick wits to dish out
whatever was thrown at him and
anger or condescension
you all no doubt recall from that chp 44
episode that from about the
1870 onward
it wasn't that easy being chinese in the
u.s
it's true that most of the chinese who
came to the us in the wake of the gold
rush had
no intention whatsoever of settling down
and making a life here
their exit plan always included
a steamer back to hong kong or china
but many of those who came early in the
1840s and 50s
planned to stay a while i guess you
could call them the first
chinese americans they figured they'd
stay right where they were
america seemed like a land of
opportunity so far as they could tell
no taiping rebels no warlords famine
this place the usa wasn't bad
one of the terrible things about the
exclusion x was that
not only did it seal the door shut for
any aspiring
chinese immigrant laborers it also
affected those who were already here
people like wang chan fu and many who
came before him
like i just described these were
naturalized citizens since long before
the exclusion act
and in a lot of cases they were men who
had
cut off their cues and assimilated in
all possible ways
some even marrying caucasian wives
those chinese too all got splattered
with the mud
from the sections enumerated in the
exclusion acts
wong shinfu because he was of this group
didn't stand by and just take it he had
the mind
the wits the understanding of american
people
and the eloquence in english that
allowed him to fight back
so that's what he did pretty much up
until the day he died
which by the way even for those days
was rather young wong chin foo was not
shy about getting up in front of an
audience let's just get that out of the
way
in late 1868 21 years of age
he gave his first performance wowing an
audience at an alexandria virginia
church who paid a quarter
to hear him speak about the wonders of
china and display the robes that he
claimed
were worn by the emperor himself ah that
was his shtick
americans in the mid to late 19th
century
didn't know too much about china and
it's likely they had never seen an asian
person
wong figured that out right away and
besides
of the 63 000 or so chinese in the u.s
the overwhelming share lived west of the
continental divide
so wang made a modest living
giving all these lectures about china
chinese customs
religion and the state of affairs there
and this was a staple of wong's
throughout his
last decades he knew how to put on a
good show
by every indication wong chun fu was
very proud of his
cultural roots and of course he came
from the same province as confucius
and he loved explaining all this to
americans
wong toured around the nation slowly
working his way westward
by october of 1870 he pulled into san
francisco
most likely via the very
transcontinental railroad that had been
completed one year before
from there his introduction to the usa
came to an
end and he sailed back to china landing
there in 1871.
as i mentioned sally holmes and the
whole baptist church did not get their
return on investment that they had hoped
for
wong shin food decided early on he
wasn't going to become a preacher
now i don't know if this was the exact
reason why but
there was something about the
missionaries that really rubbed him the
wrong way he didn't like how these
missionaries
always sent these reports home about how
horrible the chinese were painting them
in the worst possible light
there are plenty of tragic and heroic
stories about what the early
missionaries faced in the 1860s and 70s
but still
wong ching fu didn't like how they
always seemed to accentuate the negative
aspects of the chinese masses to the
folks back home
wong got himself hitched while he was
back in shandong
marrying on june 8th 1871 in a christian
ceremony in dungjoe
wong took on the name wong yin ping
after he got married
a lot of men did that back in those days
he still wasn't officially wong chin foo
yet that came later
his son wong fu chang would be born two
years later in 1873.
he moved on to shanghai next a chinese
who was fluent in mandarin and
english to the degree he was they had
much better prospects there than in a
sleepy town like dangchao he got a job
for a while with
shanghai customs as an interpreter he
wasn't there long and it was
right about this time wong made his
break with christianity
shortly afterwards in 1872 wong was
excommunicated from the baptist church
and then he found work upriver from
shanghai in zhanjiang
and it was in zhenjiang that wong got
himself mixed up with a group with
some anti-manchu sentiments
china especially in the south was rife
with all kinds of anti-manchu feelings
most just wanted for them to ultimately
rot to death but some weren't so patient
in the
1870s and 80s in china were filled with
all kinds of incidents of civil unrest
wong wasn't cut out to be a rebel
soldier or leader
and his career ended almost as soon as
he got involved
as a result of this aborted uprising he
was trying to launch and janjang
wong chin foo had to flee china he
didn't make it to the 10 most wanted
list but his crimes
did rise to the level of prince gong
which is pretty high up in the manchu
leadership
prince gong's father was the daokuang
emperor his half-brother
was the chianfeng emperor and that
counted for something
prince gong was a giant of 19th century
chinese diplomatic relations
prince gong had written to the american
embassy of wong chin foo
quote there was a linguist named wang
yen ping who for some time since got up
an illegal combination at shanghai with
some vagabonds
and without any certificate for what he
was doing took a lot of arms up to
changing
no doubt with the design of plunder and
brigandage
hearing that search was making for him
he managed to flee the country
end quote after three years wong
indeed fled china and he wouldn't come
back for a very long time
partly because the qing dynasty didn't
end in his lifetime and he
had a price on his head having already
had a taste of american values and apple
pie
wong surely thought he could do well on
the lecture circuit spinning yarns about
his role as a revolutionary fighter in
china
this story would work well with his
whole repertoire developed during his
first day in america in no time at all
shortly after his arrival in the fall of
the new york times ran a piece that said
of huang's mission to china
quote he traveled from place to place
delivering addresses
full of information on subjects so
entirely new to his hairs
and so much at variance with their
notions of life
is to speedily cause him to become an
object of concern
and distrust to government officials he
launched his schemes with a rapidity
that was
perfectly astounding to the celestial
mind and in a brief space
had laid the foundation of a score more
societies
each one of which had for its purpose
the improvement of the people
mentally morally and physically one in
particular
known as the tongshanghui contemplated
the abolition of opium orgies
the propagation of the better social
customs of america and the elevation of
the masses
end quote i think you could get the main
idea
he was an embellisher the story of his
revolutionary days over the years
and the price on his head grew in size
and drama with almost every telling
in all his talk about bringing the best
of america to china
always played well in pittsburgh when
his vessel arrived in san francisco in
september
1873 smuggled on board where 14
young chinese women headed for a life
working for the hip yi tong
and their pay masters in the skin trade
wong
learned of their plight and managed to
tip off the authorities via an anonymous
letter that
led to some suspects being questioned
and led to some of the
doomed women being rescued it was
learned later that
wong was the one responsible for the
whole rescue which
of course made him a marked man with
some of san francisco's chinatown
gangstas
this was another thread that ran
throughout the rest of his life
the criminals who had their headquarters
in chinatown
never liked wong he didn't like them
either he was always defending himself
against those guys
wong milked this whole incident for all
it was worth
and got himself into the papers adding
another chapter to his story and myth
and it's right around this time
that he took on the name wong ching fu
he then went and got himself an agent
and wong hit the lecture circuit again
you see back in those days there wasn't
any internet
no tv no radio no nothing like we have
today
to amuse themselves people used to do
things like
read books and magazines attend the
theater
and enjoy live shows and lectures and
with china being something that
most people had a natural curiosity
about wong saw a market that would allow
him to make a living
supplying tall tales about the land of
his birth he went all over the country
mostly east of the mississippi and not
just to the big cities
he visited all the little nooks and
crannies of the nation
wherever his agent could get him a gig
giving his lectures
wowing the local crowds bad luck
always seemed to be just around the
corner for wong ching foo
despite his success touring the nation
as a china specialist
he ended up getting ripped off by one of
his agents it wasn't the first
it wasn't the last time wong would get
screwed by his business partners
although it said he was no angel either
when it came to his own fiduciary
obligations
he found himself in michigan the
wolverine state for a stretch
and on april 3rd 1874 he filed a
declaration of intention to become a u.s
citizen
in the kent county circuit court in
grand rapids michigan
he obtained his citizenship on the very
same day the wong ching fu
was 27 years old and his life
was already half over but what a second
half he ended up having
it was a good thing wong chun foo went
ahead and did this in 1874.
the very next year with the page act
you could start to hear the first
creaking of the hinges of the
immigration door beginning to shut
on any immigrant laborer who might call
the yellow emperor an ancestor
remember diplomats merchants and people
in academia coming from china
though scrutinized were still eligible
these immigration laws
weren't written to exclude them wong got
a bit of national shine on him when
papers across the u.s
reprinted a story that ran in the san
francisco chronicle called
a remarkable it was the story
of wong ching foo
up to that point in late 1873.
it's not certain how much of the story
was fact or fiction but it
most certainly was sensational it was so
sensational that
it caught the eye of young wing someone
who long preceded wong to the us
and though he spent many years in china
for a stretch
he was like wong very savvy when it came
to
being an american with wong jin foo
young wing knew a fraud when he saw one
perhaps out of a sense of you know who
the hell does this guy think he
is yong wing may have been the black
hand behind a deluge of bad publicity
that
discredited wong ching fu's story and
made all kinds of accusations
regarding his character his swindling
ways and
loose living this bad press
didn't bother wong and he was no slouch
when it came to fighting back and
defending his name
he continued to give lectures and more
and more he would attack
manchu rule in china prince gong
actually tried to have him extradited to
china
but wong shinfu had a new mission in
life once 1874 rolled around
the exclusion act of 1882 was still
eight years away but the anti-chinese
drum beat was getting pretty loud in the
u.s
wong was determined to turn this tide of
anti-chinese feeling
by getting out there and show the
positive side of china
and chinese domestic life and customs
to launch his new idea he got the word
out to the press that he was
china's first confucianist missionary to
the us
he proclaimed he was here in america to
do the same work as the christian
missionaries in china
but in his new lectures he also began to
speak about
protestant missionaries in china in a
tone that was
hardly complementary but he didn't say
anything bad about jesus or christianity
he just tried to point out the moral
and ethical similarities between
confucian thought
and christianity he went to great
lengths to disassociate himself from the
southern chinese who americans were
most familiar with he explained in his
lectures
that he was a northern chinese not one
of the southern cantonese who he
considered coolies
uneducated and of a much lower class
than he was
in wong's mind to put it simply these
guys made him look bad
he felt that all the negative
stereotypes about chinese in the us were
all
due to the actions of these cantonese
workers who were
only here for the money ran all the
rackets and had no intention
of assimilating or settling down in the
u.s
his ploy to call himself a chinese
missionary to the u.s
had predictable results he knew how this
would play in the court of public
opinion
his first speech on the subject made it
to the new york times which printed
quote
we have long foreseen the possibility of
a missionary to our country from the
heathen
and one has at last arrived in the
person of wong chin
foo this antipodal celebrity
has recently arrived in boston and with
commendable zeal
has at once begun his labors among the
skeptical people of that
modern athens end quote during this
period of his life
1874 1875 wong ching fu hadn't started
attacking the protestant religion but he
sure did take a few pot shots in our
internet age i'm sure you've all come
across these extremely
vigorous debates between religious and
secular people
a lot of these arguments descend into
the worst
most vile vitriolic mudslinging matches
back in the 1800s before radio well
these fights were staged in the
newspapers
and the religious forces of the day
didn't sit back and allow someone who
likes a wong ching foo to
besmirch their institution attacking
christianity was not the main theme in
any of his lectures however
he traveled across the eastern united
states and into canada
giving these intro to china 101 lectures
that wong turned into performances
people would pay something like 25 cents
for these things maybe more if it were
someone famous in boasting about china
in his lectures he said stuff like quote
we claim that the chinese empire is a
refined one
with all the opportunities of
intellectual improvement
and that the chinamen are not ignorant
heathens
and were not so thousands and thousands
of years ago they
invented some of the most useful
sciences of civilization
for example the art of printing with
movable types also engraving was first
invented by the chinese
they were the first to invent the
mariner's compass the first cannon
first suspension bridge and the first
marble structure the first civil force
and the first school all these
originated
among the heathens end quote he
continued to spread the word wherever he
went but the merits of the chinese
chinese culture and more and more
buddhism
and confucianism he also let fly a
continuous barrage of remarks
critical of the manner in which the
missionaries proselytized in china
whatever he said that was sensationalist
or controversial in any way
was always picked up by the press and
many of huang's comments
made their way to china the missionaries
there
including his one-time benefactors sally
holmes
got wind of what he was going around and
saying in these lectures and
naturally they didn't like that some
battle lines
began to be drawn wong ching foo was a
thin-skinned guy
that is he didn't like being criticized
attacked or disparaged
the slightest insults or perceived
insults
always triggered some kind of response
and sometimes fights ensued
good thing he didn't start his own
podcast throughout the 1870s
wong made it his business to rebut every
assertion made by religionists that
painted chinese in an
inferior light as the 1880s started to
come into view
the matter of chinese immigrants had
become a favorite
populist issue among the national
politicians
wong made it his mission to defend the
chinese
in his own way he told a new york sun
reporter in 1876
quote america need not be afraid that
its labor will be crippled by the
chinese
no sir each succeeding year the chinamen
in america
will claim and receive more wages our
people get rich in a few years and then
go back to china again
they never make this their home they do
not vote and they rarely become
naturalized
there are about 50 000 of us in all in
this country
the number will never amount to much
more in 10 years
those that are here will be so far
americanized
they will work for nothing less than
what is paid to americans
end quote when the call for halting
chinese immigration became
louder than ever before wong became one
of the many voices
that spoke out against all the talk of
legislation to check this
tide but after a while his ongoing
prejudice against the southern chinese
laborers got in his way
soon he began to alter his position
remember he looked down on these
cantonese workers and saw them as part
of the problem
and the reason for so much american
outrage against chinese immigrants
he insisted they were a different kind
of chinese than he was
that would be a tough argument to make
in today's world let alone a hundred and
more years ago
it was a long frustration of wong that
americans didn't understand the
difference between
northern and southern chinese before
long
wong adjusted his position and sort of
agreed that if the laws targeted these
kinds of chinese only
limits on immigration weren't so bad
after all
his main point was that the assimilated
and tax-paying chinese who were already
here who were already naturalized
speaking fluent english and living
amongst other
americans freely these were the good
chinese
and in no way should this group of which
he considered himself apart
suffer any of the indignities that were
being heaped on the masses of
southern chinese immigrants wong based
himself in chicago for a while
trouble followed him wherever he went
chinatown elements there
like elsewhere didn't like him at all
and at times tried to have him
dealt with wong chun fu continued to
wear a q
up until 1879. this was
a few years before the exclusion act
became law on may 8th
1882 so you can imagine the kind of
public discourse going on between san
francisco and new york
none of it was good and wong threw
himself in the middle of it
speaking out and coming up with
publicity stunts that called
attention to the hypocrisy and
illegality of chinese exclusion
wong shinfu with some financial backers
got into the newspaper business
he wasn't the first person in america to
publish a chinese language newspaper but
he was the first one on the east coast
to do so
on february 3rd 1883 the weekly hua mei
shin bao
came out though huamei shin bao doesn't
translate to this
he called the paper the chinese american
the first time anyone ever used this
term
regarding the tone of the paper the
washington post
wrote that wong's chinese american quote
continues to attack the celestial
embassy at washington
with extreme afferenty end quote
the representatives of the manchu ching
government in the u.s
they knew all about wong ching foo and
his anti-ching sentiment
they took their measures to quash this
paper
but the good old first amendment foiled
their plans
in addition to running the first of
several short-lived money losing papers
wong would launch in his lifetime he
earned an income writing articles for
other newspapers and magazines the
chinese american
lasted about seven months before it was
shut down
this was a small victory for not only
the qing government but also for
chinatown criminal elements whose
criminal businesses wong railed against
in his paper
by now although not what you'd call a
big time celebrity
wong ching fu had acquired a national
reputation
after the exclusion act ended chinese
immigration for these laborers
many of these cantonese workers who came
for the money
sooner or later returned to china never
to return to america
or at least not until the laws changed
this meant that the population of
chinese in the u.s
with few new immigrants to shore up
their numbers
began to decline not only did their
numbers decline
many chinese americans began to move
eastward abandoning california with so
many
vicious racists shaking their fists at
them
this is how the chinese communities in
chicago and new york
began to fill up a lot the racism
was a little nicer in new york than on
the west coast but it was still alive
and well
and the stories that got out in the
press were hardly complimentary of china
or the chinese the usual targets were
alleged
chinese hygiene and the whole laundry
list of despicable crimes that chinatown
was still famous for
running fan tan parlors and other games
of chance
prostitution female slavery and opium
people in those days the 1880s just
came out on record saying the most vile
and unflattering things about the
chinese
and the newspapers gladly printed
everything and
wherever and whenever the
anti-chinese-american accusations flew
wong would be there to stand up against
whoever it was
and he'd throw whatever dirt right back
at his accusers
using his quick mind education
and fluency in english to turn the
tables
he would often confound his detractors
beating them at their own game
using the press publicity stunts and
whatever else he could think of to
defend the chinese
against all these insinuations and
accusations
for this wong chin foo got roughed up a
lot
and he knew the drill inside out about
how to deal with getting arrested
and he spent many nights in jail and
having studied some law before
he knew his way around the american
court system too
one of wong chin foo's signature battles
concern the famous demagogue bigot and
scourge of the chinese-americans
mr dennis kearney kearney had taken it
upon himself to lead the efforts to get
rid of all chinese from these shores
he had a lot of support from organized
labor and the lower classes
he was one of those guys who was quite
gifted as a speaker
but his diatribes against the chinese
and also against the capitalist class
were a little too much for many he was
hot for a few years but his
circus train ran out of steam after a
while
he was an irish immigrant from county
cork
the irish and the chinese sort of had a
kind of
rivalry that got a little violent every
now and then
they both competed for the same muscle
jobs working in the mines and on the
railroads
and i don't have to tell you who was
always willing to work for less
and on top of that their respective
neighborhoods and the cities they might
both populate
tended to rub up against one another on
a map
and you know what happens when that
happens so there was no love lost
between these two ethnic groups back in
the 19th century
wong ching foo had of course read about
dennis kearney and knew who he was and
what he stood
for so when kearney an immigrant himself
took his populist show on the road in
all the way to the big apple wong sought
him out
in response to kearney's rants about how
horrible the chinese were
wong fired an opening salvo in this way
quote
i belong to the most ancient empire on
this globe
you by your statement belong to the most
dependent
and ill-treated nation of serfs ever
deprived their liberties
the flag of my country floats over the
third greatest navy in the world
yours is to be seen derisively displayed
on the 17th of march in public streets
and triumphantly hoisted on an
occasional gin mill
the ambassadors and consuls of my nation
rank at every court in europe with those
of russia
germany england and france those of your
race may be found
cooling their heels in the lobbies of
any common council in which
rum selling interests in politics
predominates
the race which i represent is centuries
old in
every art and science that of which you
are a spokesman
apologizes for its present ignorance and
mental obscurity
with the plea that your learning and
literature are lost in the mythical past
end quote charlie chan was still 44
years in the future but this is how
chinese tended to sound
when they would attempt to fight back in
public and the press would have a field
day mocking their chinglish
few chinese had wang chin foo's
combination of eloquence
education and guts to stand up to people
that were bigger and more powerful than
he was
he accused kearney of quote stirring up
the prejudices of your ignorant but
well-meaning brother irishmen end quote
and when kearney dodged wong and refused
to face off in a public debate
wong ratcheted up the heat a little he
started making all these public
statements about how
kearney was too scared to debate him and
the whole thing of course became a
national spectacle
in the end wong ching foo had stood up
to kearney and his racist politics
whether anyone was willing to admit it
or not wong bested his opponent in the
press
it would be another four years before
they faced off in person
this was another wake-up call for wong
shin foo and perhaps for many other
chinese americans
one thing the irish knew was how to
organize politically
the chinese hadn't figured that one out
yet
of course their numbers were far fewer
but wong knew the reason the politician
screwed them was because
they didn't vote because they didn't
have any political power
they had nothing to bargain with on
these political issues of the day
on july 29th 1884 wong
in his capacity as a chinatown central
figure
called a meeting of all chinese voters
in the new york area
at this meeting wong told his fellow
chinese
quote we are a small drop in the mighty
ocean of american politics
but as small and insignificant as we are
i feel certain that had we only attended
to this duty as citizens of this country
we might have prevented the passage of
the shameful anti-chinese bill by
republican congress
end quote wong tried to organize as best
he could and to create some sort of
political organization
and into 1883 1884 1885
violence against chinese raged up and
down the west coast
and you'll recall from chp 44 the rock
springs massacre where a dispute
over chinese depressing workers wages
led to the violent death of 28 chinese
with 15
injured chinese homes and businesses
were fair game for the racist mobs in
the
great state of wyoming wong jin foo was
in 1884 37 years old
any business venture he was associated
with either went buster
ended in acrimony or both now he started
toying with the idea of opening up a
chinese theater
that would bring a little chinese style
entertainment to new york
the press as usual whenever wong was
involved had a field day with the usual
degree of
snark puns and jabs at whatever it was
that
wong ching fu was promoting wong earned
his daily manto
remember he was a northerner mostly as a
writer
selling his stories to various new york
newspapers and
magazines lectures and newspapers were
his
meat and potatoes but these newspaper
editors
always had to put their best fact
checkers on these
pieces wong submitted he had a
reputation for
stretching the truth to make his points
readers just
ate up all his articles describing
everything there was that he could
recall or make up
about his ancestral homeland and the
culture that he
took so much pride in and i didn't
mention this in that chp 128
episode on the history of american
chinese cuisine but
wong ching foo was one of those writers
in the 1880s
who wrote about chinese cuisine and chop
suey in particular which
he early on called quote the national
dish of china
he contributed a voice to the discussion
about this
exotic ciao chop that could
be had by the adventurous who were
willing to risk an evening in chinatown
if he wasn't the first to write about
chop suey well he certainly was one of
the first
in march of 1886 the north american
review ran a series of articles where
they invited people to write about
religion
the title of each article was supposed
to start
quote y-m-i-a and then you filled in
your religion
wong was one of those invited to submit
a piece and this one
really got a lot of attention up until
now
his beef was with the protestant
missionaries who he believed gave china
a bad name
through all their dispatches from the
front lines
but christianity that was something else
wong didn't attack jesus
or christians but with his contributions
to the review
called why am i a heathen he threw down
the gauntlet in a rather spectacular way
so when he came out of the ring swinging
like he did
satirizing the religion the money aspect
and all the various forms of
christianity
the forces who all disagreed with him
pounced
this tempest was not only felt across
the u.s
but within the missionary society in
shanghai as well
everyone came forward to deconstruct
wong's arguments
you name it from life magazine on down
everyone sounded off on this one dennis
kearney came back to the u.s
east coast in october 1887 and that
month
kearney and wong finally met in person
at the offices of the new york world
and verbally slugged it out in front of
an assembled crowd
plenty of mud was slung at each other
but at least
according to the rockford illinois
gazette quote
the mandarin got the better of the san
francisco orator in the intellectual
contest
and drove kearney from position to
position until the sandlot hoodlum
gave up in disgust end quote
the new york son wrote that wong did not
quote stand on the defensive against mr
dennis kearney but assume the offensive
in a fashion which no
in this country has yet equaled
end quote despite the why am i a heathen
brouhaha
wong bounced back after his trouncing of
dennis kearney
he continued on the lecture circuit
after that
canada followed the united states and
enacting anti-chinese immigration laws
naturally wong went up there to go speak
out against this
he sparred with the canadian government
in 1888
mostly about a fifty dollar head tax
that was levied against any chinese
coming to canada
like him or hate him wong remained a
fixture in the new york chinatown
community
he continued to write for many
publications speaking his mind and
as always trying to influence american
attitudes towards chinese
sometimes he gave his american readers
food for thought sometimes he missed the
mark
he had both loyal supporters and enemies
who wished him death or worse in 1892
10 years after the passing of the
chinese exclusion act there came the
gary act
this extended the exclusion of chinese
laborers and added some more degrading
conditions
most odious of all was the regulation
about chinese having to
henceforth carry identity cards wong
along with a few other chinatown
heavyweights formed the chinese equal
rights league
even the six companies in san francisco
the chinese benevolent association
they too got involved in the chorus
calling on chinese
not to register for these id cards a
meeting was held in new york
september 22nd 1892
attended by 200 of the leading chinese
in the community
quote chinese who dress in american
trousers and derby hats the
chicago tribune pointed out in the end
after impassioned
speeches regarding the gary act those
assembled
adopted the following resolution quote
we the citizens of the united states and
mass meeting assembled
do hereby resolve and declare that said
bill is monstrous
inhuman and unconstitutional and we
hereby pledge ourselves
to support and protest against said bill
which has been entered by the chinese
equal rights league of new york city
end quote the chinese equal rights
league gave it their best shot
throughout 1892
by the end of the year though the new
york times had written quote
the chinese equal rights league has not
chosen a favorable time for agitating
for the repeal of the chinese
exclusion act it is asking too much to
demand the chinese residents here
be forthwith admitted to citizenship and
given the franchise of the nation
end quote the piece concluded by saying
the chinese equal rights lay quote
should be more moderate in its
representations and more modest in its
demands
end quote the gary act passed in 1892
wong ching foo fought it with everything
he had
later on november 2nd 1893 he even
appeared before a congressional
committee
and faced down thomas gary himself to
get part of the act struck down
but in the end all efforts failed
over the next few years wong ching foo
was based in chicago and
busied himself with various money-losing
ventures that he was passionate about
there was another newspaper a confucian
temple
his political activities and of course
agitating for the end of manchu rule in
china
late in 1896 he received a letter from
his son in china
since wong left china in 1873 he had
neither
seen his son or his wife who was now ill
in june of 1898 wong headed to china
arriving in hong kong on june 20th it
had been two and a half decades since
wong qingfu had left asia
upon arrival in hong kong wong had to
deal with the matter of a passport
he applied at the consulate and was
granted a passport
after all he had the letters of
introduction and all the necessary
evidence that showed
he was a naturalized american citizen so
why shouldn't the american consul there
issue a passport
after securing his passport in hong kong
wong went after some old business
partners trying to collect on debts that
were due to him
as was pretty much always the case he
got screwed
he managed to recover some money but
nothing near what he expected
but that wasn't the end of it the
consulate had checked with the state
department regarding the issuing of the
passport to wong
after all he was still chinese and the
consul in hong kong wasn't sure about
how things worked exactly with you know
the new laws
after clarification the consulates
tracked down wong
seized his passport and promptly
canceled it as scott seligman put it
succinctly quote
it was the final indignity visited upon
wong ching foo by his adopted country
of which he was in fact a bona fide
citizen
end quote wong left hong kong and the
ghastly july summer heat arriving in
dangjo
in shandong sometime later that month
he had a tearful and emotional reunion
with his wife and son who he had not
seen since he was born
it didn't take long for wong chin foo to
hear word that
the manchus had sent the authorities to
come look for him
from dangchao wong went east to way high
an hour car ride west of one of his
childhood homes of jerful the british
were now in command of the port city of
waihi
and wong figured he'd be safer there and
it was there in way high
on september 13 1898 wong chin food died
he died from heart failure and no doubt
a broken heart
brought on by his long fight all the
disappointments and political setbacks
piled one on top of the other
his business failures always getting
swindled but perhaps most of all
his failure to change the anti-chinese
laws
and no doubt also the rigors of travel
back in those days
so what was wong ching foo's legacy the
exclusion laws continued on for decades
after his death
45 more years he couldn't change those
in his lifetime
he was the first person to call himself
a chinese-american
and spoke out for what this meant to him
someone who learned english
who dressed in the american way cut
their cues off
and didn't live out in public all those
negative
stereotypes american people had of the
cheating gambling opium smoking chinamen
he established the first chinese
political party in the country
and he was the first to testify before
the u.s
congress let me quote again from scott
seligman quote wong's importance lies
not merely in envisioning and
articulating the goal but in the means
he employed and the energy he expended
in trying to achieve it no one else
traversed the country as tirelessly to
speak out for america's chinese or wrote
as extensively or as passionately to
portray them as
benign and acceptable wong offered
americans a
broad window on china and was for many
the face of the chinese in america
wong surely changed some american minds
and won some hearts through his very
demeanor if not his
herculean efforts and his boundless
optimism
he not only had to convince americans
that chinese were law-abiding citizens
whom they need not fear
he also had to persuade his own
countrymen that there was a value in
assimilation
even as the messages coming from white
america were so
hate-filled and discouraging end quote
so wong chin foo everyone not a
household name but certainly a life
worth knowing about
i strongly recommend the book the first
chinese american the remarkable life of
wong ching foo
the author of scott seligman some of you
may be familiar with some of his earlier
works
the cultural revolution cookbook three
tough
chinese business etiquette chinese at a
glance
and now you're talking chinese his two
most recent works
are the third degree the triple murder
that shook washington
and changed american criminal justice
and most recently
the great kosher meat wars of 1902.
i'll have a link to all those books at
my website at tcup.media
go check it out i'm not going to give
you the hard sell or anything but anyone
out there wishing to support the chp
and all my efforts at getting this
material out there
go head over to patreon.com
slash china history podcast and sign up
three bucks
36 bucks a year you cannot fare them
how thankful i will be patreon not your
thing
go over to paypal dot me slash china
history podcast
throw me a few pesos florins dinars or
rupees
and you could rest assured you'll have
my eternal thanks
okay that's it for now laszlo montgomery
here signing off from
los angeles california wishing you all
my very best and beseeching you
as i always do to come back next time
for another exciting episode
of the china history podcast knowing
about
i strongly recommend the book the first
chinese-american the remarkable life of
wong chin foo
the author of scott seligman some of you
may be familiar with some of his earlier
works the cultural revolution cookbook
three tough chinese business
etiquette
chinese at a glance and now you're
talking chinese
his two most recent works are the third
degree the triple murder that shook
washington and changed american criminal
justice
and most recently the great kosher meat
wars of 1902
i'll have a link to all those books at
my website at tcup.media
go check it out i'm not going to give
you the hard sell or anything but anyone
out there wishing to support the chp and
all my
efforts at getting this material out
there go head over to patreon.com
slash china history podcast and sign up
three bucks
36 bucks a year you cannot fail them
how thankful i will be patreon not your
thing
go over to paypal.me slash
china history podcast throw me a few
pesos
florins dinars or rupees and you can
rest assured
you'll have my eternal thanks okay
that's it for now
laszlo montgomery here signing off from
los angeles california
wishing you all my very best and
beseeching you
as i always do to come back next time
for another exciting episode
of the china history podcast
you